---
kindle-sync:
  bookId: '49080'
  title: The Sounds of Life
  author: Karen Bakker;
  highlightsCount: 45
---
# The Sounds of Life
## Metadata
* Author: [[Karen Bakker;]]

## Highlights
Ecoacoustics, also called acoustic ecology or soundscape studies, entails listening to the environmental sounds generated by entire landscapes.20 Imagine standing in the middle of a tropical forest: you might hear the rustle of leaves, the cries of birds, the roar of a waterfall. These combined sounds form what is called a soundscape.21 Soundscapes can reveal much about the functional condition of ecosystems. A degraded ecosystem sounds very different than a healthy one. — location: [125]() ^ref-45727

---
Simply by listening, an ecoacoustician can tell you the difference between a tree farm and a forest, or detect early signs of degradation in a seemingly intact ecosystem; using ecoacoustics, we can now map wilderness areas without ever setting foot there.23 — location: [132]() ^ref-44260

---
The digitization of any field creates a tsunami of data. In order to deal with this data deluge, scientists have applied new techniques, derived from artificial intelligence, to analyze their digital acoustic recordings.25 Algorithms originally developed for human use (such as the speech-to-text algorithms in a smartphone) are being adapted to analyze and interpret the voices of other species.26 These bioacoustics algorithms have become exponentially more powerful in the past few years: they can identify species and even individual animals, much like voice recognition software. — location: [142]() ^ref-38620

---
require some degree of manual verification. — location: [148]() ^ref-42577

---
Are we one animal among others, or does something (language, toolmaking, logos) truly set us apart?37 — location: [207]() ^ref-46708

---
Greek poets wrote that felling a tree was akin to committing murder.38 — location: [212]() ^ref-40634

---
Once, explains Robin Wall Kimmerer, we all spoke the same language—humans and animals alike; but when colonial settlers came, writes Anishinaabe legal scholar John Borrows, nonhuman voices fell silent.39 — location: [213]() ^ref-39098

---
deep sound channel.26 Through this channel, which is about half a mile under the surface of the ocean at midlatitudes, sound waves are able to travel thousands of miles. Discovered in the 1940s, the channel (christened SOFAR—sound fixing and ranging channel) became the focus of intense military interest, as it could be used to detect sounds from ship sonar, the marine acoustic equivalent of radar. — location: [308]() ^ref-23797

---
whales were communicating with one another along the SOFAR — location: [335]() ^ref-27415

---
SOFAR channel, — location: [335]() ^ref-58181

---
In contrast, sound travels four times faster in water than in air. Underwater, marine animals can hear much farther than they can see. Through the process of evolution, whales became finely tuned to the sonic environment of the ocean, and sound became the primary way that they hunt, socialize, and escape predators. Some species evolved the ability to hear in the deep infrasonic, while others evolved hearing in the high ultrasonic. The auditory ganglion (nerve cell) densities of whales are double those of the average land mammal; this exceptionally high auditory nerve fiber count means that whales are wired for more complex signal processing than most land mammals, including humans.37 — location: [353]() ^ref-19475

---
Each pod has its own unique dialect of calls that calves learn from their mothers over several years, one of the most complex cultural communication repertoires in the animal world.40 As pod members stay together their entire lives, their dialects form part of their identity and indicate a strong cultural bond; killer whales with different dialects rarely intermingle for long.41 These dialects are so distinct that scientists (and even trained amateurs) can differentiate between pods simply by listening. — location: [365]() ^ref-24778

---
Some whale calls are also very loud: sperm whales, the loudest animal in the world, can vocalize at over 200 decibels, louder than a rocket launch or a jet engine at takeoff (and loud enough to burst your eardrums if you were swimming nearby). — location: [370]() ^ref-32123

---
She also discovered that the longer songs have an internal structure, which she compared to stanzas (or rhymes) repeating at specific intervals or at the end and beginning of phrases; this deeper layer of rhyme-like repetitions raised the possibility that whales, like humans, use mnemonic reminders for longer songs.60 — location: [458]() ^ref-31532

---
The IWC ban came just in time, as many whale species narrowly avoided complete extinction.68 — location: [482]() ^ref-17086

---
“I was listening to a whale singing in Ireland, and I was listening to it off of Bermuda,” — location: [498]() ^ref-17783

---
Using tax revenues collected from a nearby oil boom, the Eskimo Whaling Commission then launched an ambitious scientific study, the first of its kind in the Arctic: a multiyear bioacoustics study of bowheads, the largest ever conducted.12 — location: [574]() ^ref-3610

---
Each doubling of ocean noise reduces a whale’s communication radius by a factor of two: over twenty years, for instance, an acoustic radius of 1,000 miles could shrink to just 250 miles, limiting the range over which whales can navigate, find food, and locate potential mates. — location: [707]() ^ref-62187

---
The whales, they say, are watching humans as much as we watch them. — location: [802]() ^ref-61944

---
attunement of a hunter arises from the intimacy of the hunt. The Iñupiat continue to hunt in small skiffs, either skin-covered umiat or aluminum boats, that are much smaller than the whales; the whale is taken with a harpoon that is no larger to the whale than a small screwdriver would be to us (although the harpoon is, today, often armed with an explosive tip). During a hunt, the Iñupiat spend long hours observing whales and often slowly approach a whale as it gazes at them. Sometimes, the whale chooses to position itself in a way that allows it to be safely harpooned; other times, it swims away. The whales, they say, are watching humans as much as we watch them. — location: [798]() ^ref-37010

---
The whales, Iñupiat elder Harry Brower explained, choose to give themselves to the humans—but only if they are deserving. — location: [804]() ^ref-33473

---
Enthralled, Katy looked up to see a forlorn look on Carl’s face. “Goddamned infrasound,” he mumbled.10 All these years teaching and studying the acoustics of the natural world, and no one had thought to speed up the tapes. It fell to Payne, a classically trained musician, to make the landmark discovery. In the ensuing months, a systematic analysis of hundreds of hours of recording revealed an extensive array of elephants calls, some of them within infrasonic range, that seemed to function over long distances. Unique calls were made in many contexts, such as soothing an upset companion, shooing a stray baby back to its mother, sounding the alarm, or shepherding a group from one spot to another. — location: [883]() ^ref-44991

---
Kenya’s Amboseli National Park; the elephants retreated rapidly when recordings of Maasai male hunters were played, but were relatively unperturbed by recordings of Maasai women and children, or Kamba men (another ethnic group, which does not hunt elephants). McComb’s research provides further evidence that elephants can determine not only ethnicity but also gender and age from acoustic cues in human voices.67 — location: [1131]() ^ref-53201

---
While waiting for the fat to render, the men would roast alive any remaining hatchlings. The mothers would have listened, helplessly, to the sounds of their babies being killed. They might have cried out to their children. Perhaps their children called back. Perhaps the hunters didn’t hear them; — location: [1463]() ^ref-53321

---
Like a self-fulfilling prophecy, acoustic enrichment can help dead reefs regenerate. The most recent research confirms that the success of coral reef restoration is detectable in the — location: [1767]() ^ref-32985

---
the time to listen. Project — location: [1854]() ^ref-62225

---
Project Florence — location: [1854]() ^ref-65131

---
PhytlSigns — location: [1880]() ^ref-857

---
explored a quickly evolving frontier of research on plant sensing, from philosopher Michael Marder’s Plant-Thinking, to forest ecologist Suzanne Simard’s In Search of the Mother Tree, to evolutionary ecologist Monica Gagliano’s Thus Spoke the Plant.19 — location: [1907]() ^ref-9295

---
Michael Marder’s Plant-Thinking, to forest ecologist Suzanne Simard’s In Search of the Mother Tree, to evolutionary ecologist Monica Gagliano’s Thus Spoke the Plant.19 — location: [1908]() ^ref-52340

---
Michael Pollan in a 2013 New Yorker article titled “The Intelligent Plant,” — location: [1910]() ^ref-26445

---
Perhaps because it implies that animals and plants are conveying meaning, or expressing emotion, ideas with which most scientists remain uncomfortable. Or perhaps we are fearful of projecting our own emotions onto nonhumans. As Carl Safina argues, we need to walk a fine line: while it is important to avoid projecting human-derived concepts onto other species, it is equally important not to deny the possibility of nonhuman — location: [2157]() ^ref-13437

---
“With its worldview of respect, responsibility, and reciprocity with nature, [traditional ecological knowledge] does not compete with science or detract from its power but extends the scope of science into human interactions with the natural world.”79 — location: [2180]() ^ref-14772

---
As she explains, recent research has proved that bats have the necessary prerequisites for communication using symbols: vocal learning, trainability, associative learning, imitation, and social knowledge.58 — location: [2434]() ^ref-25174

---
Even if bats possessed language and consciousness, some argue, we could not discern this capacity; the communicative and cognitive gap between humans and other species is, they argue, simply too great.74 In making this argument, many refer to an influential paper published in 1974 by philosopher Thomas Nagel, titled “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?”75 Nagel argued that analyzing animal consciousness would remain a scientifically intractable problem, even if — location: [2498]() ^ref-5935

---
An AI system, embedded in a bat-like “soft robot,” living among bats since infancy, may develop a better understanding of what it means to be a bat than humans. — location: [2517]() ^ref-2491

---
Knörnschild also sounds a cautionary note about using our newfound knowledge to attempt to communicate with bats. Perhaps, she suggests, we should not try to communicate with them at all, or at least not without guardrails that would prevent exploitation of our newfound knowledge. But her caution is not equally shared by all scientists. As the next chapter explores, honeybee researchers have attempted for years to use digital technologies for interspecies communication. And they have recently succeeded. — location: [2530]() ^ref-32480

---
Yet the bees’ dance remains the only known nonhuman language that uses bodily movement to represent complex symbolic meanings, and is still considered by many scientists to be the most complex symbolic system that humans have decoded to date in the animal world. — location: [2645]() ^ref-7275

---
Honeyguides—likely guided by their outsize sense of smell—know where the bees are but can’t get at the wax. So they partnered up with an animal that isn’t nearly as good at finding bees but knows how to get the wax: humans. In hunting together, the honeyguides and honey hunters have evolved a subtle form of cooperative communication. Scientists have confirmed the claims of the Boran people in northern Kenya that they can infer the distance, direction, and time to the nest from the bird’s calls, — location: [2792]() ^ref-35534

---
Honeyguides are brood parasitic: their parents (whom they never meet) lay their eggs in other birds’ nests, puncturing the host eggs they find to enhance the honeyguide hatchlings’ survival rate. The — location: [2814]() ^ref-19001

---
The sperm whale communication system could potentially be decoded using well-known tools from information theory and linguistics. Studies of human languages have demonstrated the universality of several laws of linguistics. For example, the Zipf-Mandelbrot law holds that human languages display a common pattern in which a few words are used very frequently, while the majority of words are used relatively rarely; Zipf’s law of abbreviation holds that the more frequently a word is employed, the shorter it tends to be; — location: [2942]() ^ref-13297

---
In these cases, bioacoustics could serve to tame species previously resistant to human domestication, deepening exploitation rather than conservation of nature. Could biomimetic robots, acting as translators between humans and other species, simply serve to command animals to serve human ends? — location: [3198]() ^ref-14391

---
storage. When they die, each whale sequesters — location: [3427]() ^ref-43187

---
Whales are highly efficient at carbon storage. When they die, each whale sequesters an average of 30 tons of carbon dioxide, taking that carbon out of the atmosphere for centuries. For comparison, the average tree absorbs only 48 pounds of CO2 a year.36 From a climate perspective, each whale is the marine equivalent of thousands of trees. Whales also help sequester carbon by fertilizing the ocean as they excrete nutrient-rich waste, in turn increasing phytoplankton populations, — location: [3426]() ^ref-42721

---
You and I could never sing like a whale or buzz like a bee, but computers and biomimetic robots can. Our digital devices have brought us to the brink of a new era in digitally mediated interspecies communication. This could transform not only environmental conservation but also our understanding of nature, and what it means to be human. How might we choose to live on this planet when the voices of creation are (once again) both audible and meaningful to us? — location: [3705]() ^ref-62690

---
